feat: spring docs pubsub #7722 (#1220)
lightbend/kalix-jvm-sdk: docs/src/modules/spring/pages/actions-publishing-subscribing.adoc

= Publishing and Subscribing with Actions

include::ROOT:partial$include.adoc[]

A very common use case when building Microservices is to publish and subscribe to a stream of events. The source of events can be the journal of an event sourced entity, the value entity state changes, a https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/docs/overview[Google Cloud Pub/Sub] or Apache Kafka topic for asynchronous messaging between services.

With Actions you can:

- subscribe to events emitted by an event sourced entity within the same service.
- subscribe to state changes emitted by a value entity within the same service.
- subscribe to events from Event Sourced Entities published as xref:service-to-service.adoc[service to service eventing]
- subscribe to external events from https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/docs/overview[Google Cloud Pub/Sub] or https://kafka.apache.org/[Apache Kafka].
- publish events to a Google Cloud Pub/Sub or Apache Kafka topic.

> Messages are guaranteed to be delivered at least once. This means that receivers must be able to handle duplicate messages.

Reviewer: I think all this section is a good candidate to have in a partial shared between java and spring docs.. It's very self-contained and can't see it change a lot.

small independent note: since we link to google pub/sub, should we add a link to kafka too on the first paragraph?

Author: It makes sense. Do you know if we other partial common to Java and Spring already?

Author: I'm having second thoughts. I prefer if we leave this optimization after we have the docs in better shape.

Author: :) I did add the link in a paragraph below. I move it from there to here.

Reviewer: > Do you know if we have other partials common to Java and Spring already?

Yeah, I did it for the intro in eventsourced entities and I think I will do the same for timers. But we can evaluate later if we think it's worth or not.

== Subscribing to an Event Sourced Entity

You can subscribe an Action to events from an Event Source Entity. To receive messages from the entity, you can annotate a method with `@Subscribe.EventSourcedEntity` and specify the class of the entity. The input type of the method must be the same of the events generated by the entity.

The following example assumes the existence of an xref:eventsourced.adoc[Event Sourced Entity] counter that emits events of type `CounterEvent` with subtypes `ValueIncreased` and `ValueDecreased`.

[source,java,indent=0]
.src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java
----
include::example$spring-eventsourced-counter/src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java[tag=sub-ESE-action]
----
<1> subscribing to the events from the Counter.
<2> setting the method input type to the events produced by the counter.
<3> any return is valid. See NOTE.

> The events from the entity are delivered to the Action. The implementation may vary, for this simplified example you are just logging it, but it could a forward to some other component or external service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The events from the entity are delivered to the Action and what to do with those is up for implementation. For this simplified example you are just logging it, but it could also do a forward to some other component or external service.
```

[NOTE]
====
The return value of the method is an `Action.Effect` with message `0`, but can be any other of type `Action.Effect<Integer>` as the return type of the method indicates. The Kalix framework needs the response to ensure that the event was successfully processed. If no exception is thrown and the method returns a value, the framework assumes that the event was successfully processed and marks it as such. This allows the next event to be sent to the subscribing method.  However, if an exception is raised and not handled, this action will not process any more events until the necessary handling is added. It will raise the same error over and over again until the application is fixed and restarted.
====

== Subscribing to a Value Entity

> You can subscribe an Action to events from an Value Entity. To receive messages from the entity, annotate a service method `@Subscribe.ValueEntiy` and specify the class of the entity. The same applies as for subscribing to an Event Sourced Entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can subscribe an Action to events from a Value Entity. To receive messages from the entity, annotate a service method `@Subscribe.ValueEntiy` and specify the class of the entity. The same applies as for subscribing to an Event Sourced Entity.
```

== Subscribing to a Topic

> To receive messages from a from Google Cloud Pub/Sub or Apache Kafka topic, annotate the service method `@Subscribe.Topic` and specify the topic name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To receive messages from a Google Cloud Pub/Sub or Apache Kafka topic, annotate the service method `@Subscribe.Topic` and specify the topic name.
```

The events from the topic are delivered to the Action and in this simplified example they are only logged.

[source,java,indent=0]
.src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java
----
include::example$spring-eventsourced-counter/src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java[tag=sub-topic-action]
----
<1> subscribing to the events from topic 'counter-events'. 
<2> setting the method input type to the events produced by the counter.
<3> any return is valid. See NOTE in Subscribing to an Event Sourced Entity.

> Note that by default, Kalix assumes the message in the topic was serialized as JSON and as such deserialize it into a `CounterEvent`. You can find more about serialization in Kalix here xref:spring:serialization.adoc[]

Reviewer: Make use of the "NOTE" special section

```suggestion
NOTE: by default, Kalix assumes the message in the topic was serialized as JSON and as such deserialize it into a `CounterEvent`. You can find more about serialization in Kalix here xref:spring:serialization.adoc[].
```

Author: I used it already I was feeling I would be abusing it.

Reviewer: I haven't actually rendered it, so you certainly have a better perception..

Author: I used your suggested below "IMPORTANT".

== Receiving messages from an external Topic

In the above example, you consumed JSON messages from a topic that you control. If you are consuming an external topic, the message format may not be under your control and may not be JSON.

> In such case, the Action definition should receive an array of bytes and deserialization must be handled within the method. See xref:spring:serialization.adoc[Handling Serialization] for more information on how to deal with data formats.

Reviewer: I'm actually not sure we support this yet for the spring-sdk.. do we?

Author: You are right, not yet. This was an idea I talked about with Renato but is not yet implemented.

Author: removed

== Subscribing and acting upon

Another possible usage for Actions is to consume events and act upon.

> For example, you may consume events from one entity or from a topic, transform to commands and send to an another entity or an external system. This is similar to the usage explained in xref:actions-as-controller.adoc[Actions as Controller], except that the Action is driven by the flow of incoming events instead of external user requests.

Reviewer: This link `xref:actions-as-controller.adoc[Actions as Controller]` will probably need to be spring specific?

Author: I'll check it out

Author: fixed

Reviewer: I think I was wrong about this one.. I just tested and with this link, by default it goes to the page under the same module...

== Publishing events to a Topic

To publish events in a topic you need also subscribe to an entity or a topic. Let's assume that you have the counter entity mentioned above. Then you can subscribe to the events of this counter, transform them and then publish them in a topic. 

To publish the events you need to add the annotation `@Publish.Topic` to the method subscribed to the events and add the name of the topic. 

[source,java,indent=0]
.src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java
----
include::example$spring-eventsourced-counter/src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java[tag=sub-ESE-pub-topic-action]
----
<1> subscribing to the events from the Counter.
<2> publishing to a topic name 'counter-events'.
<3> setting the method input type to the events produced by the counter.
<4> any return is valid. See NOTE in Subscribing to an Event Sourced Entity.

> Note that the messages stored in the topic are serialized as JSON. You cannot change this serialization.

Reviewer: Maybe use `IMPORTANT:` here?

```suggestion
IMPORTANT: the messages stored in the topic are serialized as JSON. You cannot change this serialization.
```

Author: Yeah, this is a good point my only concern when writing this and the 'Note that' above - that you suggested adding a NOTE: - is that it will lead the code with no leading text and looks somehow abrupt. But I agree it's important the reader notes it.

== Accessing the Entity ID

For many use cases, a subscriber to an event log will trigger other services and needs to pass the entity ID to the receiver. The events of an Event Sourced entity, by design, do not include the entity ID, but it is made available to the subscriber via the metadata field `subject`, accessible through `eventSubject` in the  link:{attachmentsdir}/api/io/kalix/javasdk/action/ActionContext.html[`ActionContext`{tab-icon}, window="new"].

You can access the link:{attachmentsdir}/api/kalix/javasdk/action/ActionContext.html[`ActionContext`{tab-icon}, window="new"] through method `actionContext()`.

> TODO: add type level and ignore annotations when Spring SDK with them gets released

Author: https://github.com/lightbend/kalix/issues/7799

== Publishing Entity events to a Topic

To illustrate how to publish entity events, let's assume the existence of an Event Sourced Counter entity that emits events of types: `ValueIncreased` and `ValueDecreased`. You will get the events delivered to an Action, apply some transformation and let them be published to a topic.

You can subscribe an Action to events from an Event Source Entity by annotating a method with `@Subscribe.EventSourcedEntity` and specifying the class of the entity. The input type of the method must be the same of the events generated by the entity.

To publish the events you need to add the annotation `@Publish.Topic` to the method subscribed to the events and add the name of the topic. 

[source,java,indent=0]
.src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java
----
include::example$spring-eventsourced-counter/src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java[tag=class]
----
<1> subscribing to the events from the Counter.
<2> publishing to a topic name 'counter-events'.
<3> setting the method input type to the events produced by the counter.

> <4> any return is valid. See NOTE.

Reviewer 2: Let's just say here that we return `Confirmed`

= Publishing and Subscribing with Actions

include::ROOT:partial$include.adoc[]

A very common use case when building Microservices is to publish and subscribe to a stream of events. The source of events can be the journal of an event sourced entity, the value entity state changes, a https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/docs/overview[Google Cloud Pub/Sub] or https://kafka.apache.org/[Apache Kafka] topic for asynchronous messaging between services.

With Actions you can:

- subscribe to events emitted by an event sourced entity within the same service.
- subscribe to state changes emitted by a value entity within the same service.
- subscribe to events from Event Sourced Entities published as xref:service-to-service.adoc[service to service eventing]
- subscribe to external events from Google Cloud Pub/Sub or Apache Kafka.

> - publish events to a Google Cloud Pub/Sub or Apache Kafka topic.

Author: good catch 👍

To publish the events you need to add the annotation `@Publish.Topic` to the method subscribed to the events and add the name of the topic. 

[source,java,indent=0]
.src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java
----
include::example$spring-eventsourced-counter/src/main/java/com/example/actions/CounterJournalToTopicAction.java[tag=class]
----
<1> subscribing to the events from the Counter.
<2> publishing to a topic name 'counter-events'.
<3> setting the method input type to the events produced by the counter.
<4> any return `Action.Effect` response is valid.

IMPORTANT: The messages stored in the topic are serialized as JSON. You cannot change this serialization.

== Subscribing to a Value Entity

You can subscribe an Action to events from a Value Entity. It work the same as an Event Sourced Entity except for the annotation. To receive messages from the entity, annotate a service method `@Subscribe.ValueEntiy` and specify the class of the entity. 

== Subscribing to a Topic

To receive messages from a Google Cloud Pub/Sub or Apache Kafka topic, annotate the service method `@Subscribe.Topic` and specify the topic name.

> In the following example the events from the topic are delivered to the Action and  logged.

Author: ```suggestion
In the following example the events from the topic are delivered to the Action and logged.
```

= Publishing and Subscribing with Actions

include::ROOT:partial$include.adoc[]

A very common use case when building Microservices is to publish and subscribe to a stream of events. The source of events can be the journal of an event sourced entity, the value entity state changes, a https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/docs/overview[Google Cloud Pub/Sub] or https://kafka.apache.org/[Apache Kafka] topic for asynchronous messaging between services.

With Actions you can:

- subscribe to events emitted by an event sourced entity within the same service.
- subscribe to state changes emitted by a value entity within the same service.
- subscribe to events from Event Sourced Entities published as xref:service-to-service.adoc[service to service eventing]
- subscribe to external events from Google Cloud Pub/Sub or Apache Kafka.
- publish events to a Google Cloud Pub/Sub or Apache Kafka topic.

Messages are guaranteed to be delivered at least once. This means that receivers must be able to handle duplicate messages.

== Subscribing to an Event Sourced Entity

> You can subscribe an Action to events from an Event Source Entity. To receive messages from the entity, you can annotate a method with `@Subscribe.EventSourcedEntity` and specify the class of the entity. The input type of the method must be the same of the events generated by the entity.

Author: ok. will do.

----
<1> subscribing to the events from the Counter.
<2> setting the method input type to the events produced by the counter.
<3> any return is valid. See NOTE.

The events from the entity are delivered to the Action. The implementation may vary, for this simplified example you are just logging it, but it could a forward to some other component or external service.

[NOTE]
====
The return value of the method is an `Action.Effect` with message `0`, but can be any other of type `Action.Effect<Integer>` as the return type of the method indicates. The Kalix framework needs the response to ensure that the event was successfully processed. If no exception is thrown and the method returns a value, the framework assumes that the event was successfully processed and marks it as such. This allows the next event to be sent to the subscribing method.  However, if an exception is raised and not handled, this action will not process any more events until the necessary handling is added. It will raise the same error over and over again until the application is fixed and restarted.

> ====

Author: I think is important to explain that to the user even if we return `Confirmed()`. Otherwise, the user will have the wrong model of how this works. It is very useful for me to have this model in mind and I remember when I found out that it was an aha moment. 
I'm happy to introduce a record  like`Confirmed` if you think is better. Please, let me know.

> ====

Reviewer 2: Good to explain it. Good idea. 

We can convert this NOTE into an explanation about the meaning of returning `effects().reply(Confirmed.instance)` or returning `effects().error("something went wrong")` or even throwing an exception.

> == Subscribing to a Value Entity

Author: yup

You can subscribe to a topic or an Event Source Entity by adding @Subscribe as a type level annotation, at the top of the class. This provides additional functionality for subscribing: all methods returning `Action.Effect` are selected to process incoming events. The Action will fail if it receives an event for which there is no method handler, unless the subscription is set with `ignoreUnknown = true`. 

In the following example you can take a look at how the Action is configured to ignore unknown messages because it has only one method handler for `ValueIncrease`.    

[source,java,indent=0]
.src/main/java/com/example/actions/SubscribeTypeLevelAction.java
----
include::example$spring-eventsourced-counter/src/main/java/com/example/actions/SubscribeTypeLevelAction.java[tag=class]
----
<1> set to ignore unknown events
<2> only processsing `ValueIncreased` events
<3> any return is valid. See NOTE in Subscribing to an Event Sourced Entity.

If you do not add `ignoreUnknown=true`, the action would fail when processing a `ValueMultiply`. By default is false.

== Subscribing and acting upon

Another possible usage for Actions is to consume events and act upon.

> For example, you may consume events from one entity or from a topic, transform to commands and send to an another entity or an external system. This is similar to the usage explained in xref:actions-as-controller.adoc[Actions as Controller], except that the Action is driven by the flow of incoming events instead of external user requests.

Author: Agree, although I think this is a general idea. It may be useful for the reader to abstract upon the first example. FYI This is how is it in the original docs. Would you like to remove it?
